And again, as always, as we're always reminded by our teachers, and I'll remind again myself
and all of us, just as we set out on any endeavor, especially Dharma study, contemplation, practice
,
really connecting with our motivation is so very essential and critical. And so again,
this will take a few moments, as we begin this afternoon session, to again reflect with
these three motivations, which are the essence of all the Nanyanas teachings and practices,
which are connecting with our joy, our appreciation, recognizing and rejoicing and how precious
our situation is, free of so many circumstances that would obstruct our investigation of our
true nature. And bringing out our goodness qualities, we're endowed with so many beautiful
outer and inner conditions, and free of so many situations. So really, connecting with
that joy and appreciation within that context. And then of course, then our bodhicitta that
this moment, these moments, this hour, this life can truly go only to nourish and benefit
countless beings. So really expanding our bodhicitta and acknowledging karma. And then
again, our pure purity motivation of recognizing the inherent purity of our innate experience.
Reflecting on the five perfections. So we'll spend a few minutes reflecting on the teachings
and I know a couple people had written in with questions. And both questions centered
around the guru yoga, different aspects of the guru yoga, or, you know, the living teacher.
And as we all know, especially within the Vajrayana, the living teacher connecting with
the guru, the lama, you know, that which is the perfection of wisdom, one who holds the
knowledge of the teachings, and not only the knowledge, but the realization and wisdom
of the teachings have been matured in their own mind and speech. That is so precious and
that's so critical and it's been so emphasized that we make a connection with that for why
to bring out our own qualities, our own Buddha nature. So I just thought I would get to those
questions since I think we didn't get around to that last week and the week the person
wrote we didn't see the questions till after the session. So our apologies for the delay.
And so one person was just asking about, they say, is it necessary to be personally connected
to a Buddhist teacher? Or can a student follow the written teachings offered by a qualified
Buddhist teacher? So I think, like I was just saying, I mean, definitely connecting with
a living Buddhist teacher who's alive at this time and available to us, it's not only such
a special opportunity, it's really stressed in the practice lineage how really important
it is to make contact with a teacher. And of course, the important word there was qualified
Buddhist teaching. So essentially that boils down to someone who has some degree of knowledge
of the Buddhist teachings and is actually putting them into practice. And we have some
confidence in through observing how they live their lives and hearing their teachings, not
only the formal teachings, but also just observing how they go about things and, you know, the
example they set such as our beautiful teacher, Kempo Seo and Don Joe Rinpoche. It's really
precious. And of course, we're so blessed there's so many commentaries by qualified
teachers that are out there and definitely those are wonderful to read, to contemplate,
to really bring into our practice. But really, I would really encourage everyone if you were
so blessed right now to have these great ones amongst us who are offering the teachings,
are offering empowerment, are offering transmission, are offering pith instructions, as well as the
whole body of the teachings. Those are really essential and critical that we make use of
our opportunity. So of course, the situation, especially the last couple of years with the
pandemic, have made it harder to connect, to actually go physically and receive teachings
or meet within a group situation or individually with a teacher, but things are starting to open
up again. So really, if you can, take the opportunity to go to, you know, a retreat
in person or, you know, to make an arrangement to meet with a teacher and ask, you know, because
again, this is someone alive at this time who maybe, like any friendship, we can get to know each
other. And we have that individual connection, which is really special. And the teacher can
really, this aspect of our teachings is, you know, our confidence. And so of course, that's
something
we develop over time. But we should definitely make use of it. Sorry, I'm just finding where
I put my other questions here. Where did they go? I just had them. Well, I think I can remember
what they are. I can find them here. I thought I'd also say on that last point, Kim Po-se-wong
Rinpoche, who of course is such an amazing example, both in his knowledge of the teachings
and his realization of the teachings and his ability to convey them to us. And just a beautiful
example he sets in every aspect of his life is so precious. And among those teachings, I know,
especially over the pandemic, he gave many, many kind of extended teachings on the qualities,
you know, or the qualifications of an authentic, you know, qualified teacher, as well as student.
So I know those are in the our PBC YouTube. So I'm sure you can find them there. Everything's
labeled there. So I'm going to find this other question.
So these questions are more around the actual guru yoga itself.
Which, of course, here, we're practicing the guru yoga as instructed in the Dudham Tursar
nundro. And you may read different instructions for different nundros that might have slightly
different visualizations. And even sometimes, even within the same practice, we might hear
slightly different things. So that's important to remember. But if it's coming from such great ones
,
as his own is Dudham Mupashe, Kenshin Pauldens, Shera Mupashe, Kempo Sei Wan Dong Mupashe,
we can have confidence that this is tried and true Buddha highway, really reliable instructions.
So a person was asking about, you know, when we do the guru yoga, of course, we visualize ourselves
as Raja Yogini. And before of us is Guru Padmasambhava as the embodiment of our teacher
of this life, as well as who embodies all the Buddhas of the three times, all the bodhisattvas,
all the our hearts, all the great, noble, enlightened beings. And then we make this
application, and we mingle our mind and heart with the blessings of the guru, guru, and reciting
the
Vajra Guru mantra for as much time as we have possible. And as we're doing that, receiving the
blessings from Guru Pashay's crown to our crown, from his throat to our throat, from his heart to
our heart, to all of our three centers, and then pervading our whole body. And then in the end,
there's different instructions. And this is particularly where this question is about. So
at the end of the practice, once you've been reciting the mantra, and doing the visualization,
we receive the final blessings, and then there's the dissolution of the practice. So here the
person's asking, saying that it's really hard for them to dissolve Guru Pashay into a condensed
light at the end. And it doesn't happen, that it just doesn't isn't happening for them, I guess,
and stays open, diffuse, then comes into her from the front and not the crown. So
if that's how it's happening, that's something to acknowledge. And if you're feeling like
Kempo Seyung and Pashay, Kenshin Pauld and Pashay have said so many times, and ever people have
questions about visualization, especially around how precise we can follow the visualization,
always the first really important thing is that we feel the presence. We feel our, the preciousness
of this direct connection. We feel the presence of Guru Pashay. And then of course, we have the
skillful means of the visualization. So, number one, feeling the presence. And I think if we're
truly connected with our joy, our appreciation, our bodhicitta, our devotion, and openness,
you know, then that's number one important. So if that element is there, that's good.
And then, however, I'd also just encourage too, I mean, these are all skillful means practices.
These are all specific instructions that Guru Padmasambhava, the living Buddha of this time,
gave us. And so there's, there's very skillful, powerful reasons for working with our habitual
patterns that I'd say if we can, you know, staying with the feeling of the presence
and with our bodhicitta and devotion, can gently, gently, you know, not ignore our ability to
develop our concentration and our visualization qualities, then we should, then we should do that,
you know, if we can just spend, try to visualize a little bit as instructed, then that's also good.
So I think it's a little bit both ways, not being too tight or too loose, or, you know, but staying
with the practice and really working on developing again, our concentration, as well as our non
distraction, along with our devotion and big bodhicitta, and just being open for that.
And then with this particular dissolution at the end, I think what Rinpoche is, they describe
in "Illuminating the Path" and then Dodhrim Rinpoche does in other texts too, there's different
ways
we can dissolve this, you know, and one is where Guru Rinpoche, you know, dissolves into light
and then enters into our heart, you know, and that's usually through the crown coming down,
again, through what? Our central channel into our heart channel, into our heart, which again is
said,
the heart chakra is where our Buddha nature resides.
The other is that we as "Yeshisojal" just go forward and dissolve into
Guru Rinpoche's heart. So who's going forward? Who's coming? Again, I think it's very open in
reality, which way we're going, but so do what's comfortable, but my main point is try to follow,
do the visualization as it's instructed, I think is really good for all of us, but not being too
tight and we have also part of this visualization is also again, right, is so much remembering,
remembering the purity, we're in the pure land as Vajrayogini.
So there's no reason to doubt, we're really with our practice fundamentally,
we're trying to put aside all of our doubt and hesitation when we're practicing.
All of our mundane conceptions and habitual patterns, we're releasing and connecting with
what's fresh and true to the best of our abilities. And so part of that is visualizing ourselves as
Vajrayogini in pure land with Guru Rinpoche right here with us, which is the fact all the time,
I mean, that's the point of the teachings that that's not some story. Our story, our make believe
is our obstruction to that we haven't recognized that what that truly means and how that already
is, right? So even on that degree too, as far as visualization, we don't have to think that if
even if we don't see ourselves literally according to the instructions, or we might be in a room
with
the furnishings of this particular world in this particular time, we don't need to recoil from
that, we can know that is inseparable from the pure land. And I think that's a really important
point that the teachers make with our visualization, you know, we're not trying to have a big
disconnect,
we're trying to just have a fuller connect with how things are. And then kind of along those lines,
another question here is, in this time in culture, the person's not comfortable visualizing
themselves
as a naked Vajrayogini. So they've been clothing themselves in the visualization, and just thinking
that wondering if that's acceptable from a dharmic viewpoint. So I think the answer is yes, it's
okay.
But I think it's worth considering kind of again, the profound meaning of the practice. I mean,
here again, when we're visualizing ourselves as Vajrayogini,
part of the instructions are that earth because Vajrayogini is the queen of space,
the mother of all the Buddhas is our own inherent, empty, open, pure nature.
And Yeshe Sojal is a living Buddha and perfect example of not only a living Buddha, but perfect
student as well. And so, of course, in the instructions are, we are Yeshe Sojal with a ruby
red complexion, you know, kind of in a female form around, you know, kind of really at the
beginnings
of adulthood. So like just fully formed, fresh body with black plated hair, some is up in the topk
not,
the others are coming down. And then we're, you know, wearing all kinds of, of garlands of pearls
and jewels and emeralds and tinkling bells and flower garlands and holding, you know, the copper
curved knife with a Vajra handle in our right hand up, and then the skull cup full of, you know,
ambrosia in our, in our right hand, and then sometimes with the Dhammaru. And then with the Katv
anga.
And so we are clothed in a way, of course, it's not customary. But I think a point here too is
remembering there's as far as even as far as cultures go on the common everyday level.
There's all kinds of customs of what's appropriate or inappropriate in human culture,
you know, and this is in no way to kind of denigrate whatever any, any individuals kind of
what's acceptable for them. That's not the point here. The point is remembering,
as far as human culture goes, there's all kinds of different customs of what's acceptable or
unacceptable. From acceptable being completely covered, or, you know, just the top covered or
just the bottoms covered, there's all kinds of permutations. But here, we're not so much,
we're, we're within our own practice, out kind of standing in our formal practice on the inner
level,
connecting with our inner innate qualities. So here, naked means
uncontrived, uncovered, fully revealed, you know, and that that's beautiful, that that's nothing
but
immense wisdom, compassion, big, full, pervading bodhicitta, completely realized and fulfilled.
That's what we're talking about here when we're connecting with kind of being naked.
It's just that uncontrived nature and that our body itself, right, no matter what, even if we are
wearing clothes, we're always naked under our clothes, we come into the world naked.
So to answer the question quickly, the answer is yes, do what you're comfortable with,
you know, we don't want to be blocking our practice by feeling uncomfortable and as we become more
familiar, keeping open. But again, the instructions are here for a reason, and reading about the
deeper
can really be helpful in connecting with why we're doing what we're doing. So like definitely
Rinpoche's go over in illuminating the path in the chapter on Guru Yoga, what this symbolizes,
you know, so that why with our bodhicitta, with our closeness feeling, with our devotion,
we can connect with why the symbols are there, they're there to reveal
and connect us within our direct perception to our own Buddha nature and bring out our bodhicitta.
So I hope that was somewhat clear. But yeah, so around that is do what you're comfortable with,
but then to truly remember that and then what even our body itself in this pure view
is all the elements that make up the body are the five wisdom dakinis, the five wisdom mothers,
all the the aggregates, all the the components that make up our experience are the five wisdom
fathers, you know, the five aggregates, the five elements, just that pure view, there's nothing
outside of the true nature. We're just trying to realize for ourselves, that true nature,
by these skillful means we've been given. But again, according to our capacities, according to,
you know, each one of us needs to
kind of work with what we're truly comfortable with. But definitely remembering we're trying
to move beyond our limited perceptions and things. And of course, on the common level of everyday
human affairs, being sensitive to what's appropriate or inappropriate for ourselves
and for others is very, very much part of our practice as well. So that's good. And then
I'm trying not to talk too much today. So we have more time for practice.
The other question here was around, you know, as we know, with the guru yoga we're doing here,
we're mostly concentrating on our, the three main chakras, our crown chakra,
which is white, and we can mark more connected with the own. And then the throat chakra is ruby
red, and the heart chakra, the sapphire blue home. So of course, in the in the teachings,
there's many chakras, sometimes there's, we're not focusing just on the these three, sometimes
we're also doing five. Sometimes there's more chakras. And then essentially, our whole body is
made up of chakras, what are what the junctures of where our winds are flowing. But again, here,
there's a reason Guru Rinpoche gave us this skillful means that we're just focusing on these three.
Here, the person's asking if there was a syllable for the yellow golden light in the navel. And so
I'll just say for now, definitely, there's so many instructions. But that's not necessarily part of
these instructions. So definitely, you can find out more about that. But regarding the nundra
practice here, just following this, these instructions is perfect and wonderful, you know,
as well as so are all the others, but we won't do that.
So again, all the Buddhas up to three times,
all the Arhats, all the Bodhisattvas, all the Shravakas, all the Prajekka Buddhas,
all the ordinary beings kind of just coming on the path, any good qualities they have, of course,
is because of relying on their teacher.
They all had teachers. Even in the common level, we've had teachers.
Our first teachers are our parents. So just connecting with the teacher is so vital,
so beautiful, so important. Why again, we're bringing they show us that's just like we say
in this in our lineage prayers, you know, in the palace of the ogman dhammadhatu, you know,
in the vast limitless space, basic space of all phenomena, you know, in that great palace,
the embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three times is our root teacher, the one who shows
clearly the Dharmakaya of our own mind, our own mind, which isn't anywhere else.
That we aren't somehow separate from our mind here direct shows us the Dharmakaya,
the great uncontrived vast openness of our mind, inseparable from all appearances and awareness.
That's the precious teacher that we should always, you know, in the instructions. Of course,
that's why guru yoga is so essential embodies all the practices. It's so vital, so important.
Keeping our our teacher just like it says on the crown of our head with appreciation, joy,
bodhicitta is great. And again, not just when they're giving us teachings,
not just when they're giving us some nice gift, not just when we're in trouble,
but like really always keeping the teacher in our mind and heart because they why not as some
celebrity, you know, event or fixation, but because they're truly precious
and showing us our own basic goodness and peace and helping us in our unique relationship to
remove our obscurations and our habitual patterns that through which we cause trouble for ourselves
and others and bringing out our beautiful nature. So again, that's all I'll say for today. And now
we'll we'll get to doing the practice. So I hope that's somewhat helpful. And I was somewhat clear
and not too meandering and wandering. And I'm sure I left things out. And my apologies if I've
said anything totally incorrect or confusing. But again, please feel free to write if anyone
needs has other questions or clarifying questions. It's helpful, because we're all here practicing
together. And we have such a great body of teachings that we've heard or read or practicing.
And so in a way, it seems like a really effective use of our time together on this level of
contemplation is kind of knowing what people are interested in or wondering about things like that.
So thank you. Now we'll begin our neutral practice. Again, we'll just do a minute of silence.
And we've, we've, I think, we've connected with the lineage. So we'll recite the seven line prayer.
And then with that, just knowing Gurumpushe embodies all the Buddha's of the three times. And
then we'll go from seven line prayer right to our neutral practice itself. Okay,
since we've done all of our formal lineage.